Google search has become a lot worse
than you think look at this let's say
how to secure my data okay so 1 2 3 four
four adverts these are all sponsored
links like imagine if you clicked on one
of our YouTube videos and I chose to
start with four sponsored ads before I
even got into the content Google used to
be magic it's easy to take for granted
nowadays but the ability to just find
anything you wanted in like 5 Seconds
was revolutionary when it was new but
I've been noticing more and more over
the last few years things starting to
feel a little off so I've done a deep
dive no thanks to Google and I found the
three major reasons as to why Google
search is not just in Decline but it's
borderline broken now and the way that
they started changing this results page
is the first like look at this again do
you notice something cuz aside from the
fact that four ads before your content
feels almost violating the thing that's
even worse is when you consider
something called the fold the imagined
line where if you want to see anything
past it you have to take action like
scrolling down the term comes from
newspapers where you'd want to put the
most important information not just on
the front page but specifically on the
top half of that front page so that
people can see it even when the paper is
folded up in Stacks above the fold now
newspapers never got to a stage of
having so much power that they could
regularly afford to stick big adverts
across their fold they needed the fold
to convince people to get the paper in
the first place but compare that to now
where the entire fold is just sponsored
content and it's starting to feel like
like Google's gotten too comfortable
Google has become so at ease that they
don't even feel like they need to
convince people to use them anymore this
company used to Pride specifically on
how quickly their search engine finds
you an accurate answer but now you're
either having to specifically invest
more time just to scroll past their ads
or trust that the ads have what you want
spoiler they do not otherwise those
posts would be at the top organically
without having to pay to get there oh
and you might have forgotten but a
decade ago these sponsored links used to
be highlighted in yellow indicating to
the user in a very obvious way that
these aren't organic search results so
that you could just filter them out and
sometimes they were in their own corded
off section to the right of the results
not anymore now the sponsored search
results look exactly like the genuine
search results apart from a tiny little
much less obvious sponsored text and all
of that is just for when you're
searching for answers look what happens
when you start searching for products so
I've been doing a lot of searching
recently for a new chair wow uh yet
again not a single organic result
Insight but instead an entire Carousel
of shopping ads and I think there's
something particularly interesting
happening with these shopping ads and
I'm not even talking about the fact that
no it's not just you these product
listings are taking up more real estate
on the results page nowadays than they
used to they are 34% bigger just
compared to 2021 but it's not even that
see I do a lot more internet shopping
than most people for one video sometimes
we're buying 20 products and so while
this one is more of a feeling and it's a
little harder to prove it is really
starting to feel like with shopping
Google is specifically making the
organic search results bad to make the
best way to shop directly from the ads
like whenever I'm searching for
something specific like let's say I was
trying to find the thinnest mini fridge
to fit a particular space in my room
thinnest mini fridge and would you look
at that something that completely fits
the description I've typed a fridge
that's not too big and it's thin so the
sponsored results are spot on Google
clearly understands what I'm looking for
so what happens when I scroll down and
look at the organic results okay first
up is
Amazon and nope nope nope nope uh none
of these products okay so let's go back
to Google search and just scroll down
nope that's not it that's not it that's
not it nothing here is it every one of
these fridges is short and wide which is
not what I was looking for this is
puzzling right like surely Google with
its current level of intelligence and
review data has the ability to take me
straight to the single best rated
product for exactly what I'm looking for
and yet does it not seem a little like
Google's playing Dum the difference
between how Tac sharp they are with
making sure that the sponsored
recommendations are spot on but then at
the very least not putting that same
effort into their organic results but
maybe even deliberately making them less
accurate and when you look at the
company's business model it would make
sense as to why they might do that cuz
here's the thing Google doesn't make
more money if you find the perfect
product it's not like they're out there
hoping you'll have an awesome Google
Experience and you'll go recommend
Google to five friends no Google has
your attention and they're making more
money now by making more from your
attention Google's dream situation is
that every company realizes that if they
want to sell they have to pay Google to
be part of the sponsored buying section
and I can't shake the feeling that they
are trying to create this pay to- win
environment because the sponsored
shopping segment is now not just a way
to get a little bit of a visibility
boost it's been designed to be the only
easy way for users to shop on Google
like for example let's see what happens
when you try and search for something
with a little bit more detail so let's
go back to chairs but this time world's
most comfortable chair as expected the
shopping Carousel is filled with exactly
the kinds of things I'm looking for a
varied selection of all very comfortable
things with links to buy them but then
scroll down and most of the search
results are just articles list based
articles which is a separate very big
problem that I'm getting to so I nearly
thought for a second oh this is a good
result that looks like a very
comfortable chair for  75
and then you scroll down and you see
this item is available for adoption not
for sale so I pay just for the chair to
continue to exist like what the Google
doesn't even seem to care if it takes
you to scam sites so many times when
I've been browsing for what furniture
might go into our future home we are
recommended sites like litfad in this
sponsored Carousel okay so litfad
reviews trust Pilots at the very top and
warning this company's trust score is
currently unavailable due to a breach of
trust Pilots guidelines this company has
been pressuring people to change or
remove their negative reviews and even
then it's primarily one star okay so
litfad is a scam beware of lit Fat's
customer service it doesn't take
Sherlock Homes to see that this is a
scam company I don't see any way that
Google wouldn't know that there are
companies like this that they are
actively promoting and so the only
conclusion that I can draw from this is
that either Google is completely
overwhelmed or Google doesn't care if
someone on Google is watching this then
correct me if I'm wrong I would love to
be corrected or at the very least
promise that you're working to fix this
but it sure looks like right now as long
as a company pays it doesn't actually
matter whether they're a scam or not
they go right to the top I can't tell
you how many times I've accidentally
ended up on chatbot app or better gbt
when I've been trying to search for chat
gbt because they look basically the same
and they just paying to be ranked higher
than chat GPT these companies their
entire business model is basically
people accidentally clicking on them it
didn't always work like this Google when
they started out did not use to make a
lot of money and that was on purpose you
know there was a time when Google would
receive actual fan mail with checks and
cash inside from people saying we love
your product and you deserve to be
making more money than you are and
that's because of the founders who in
their original paper presenting Google
to the world specifically said
advertising income often provides an
incentive to provide poor quality search
results we believe the issue of
advertising causes enough mixed
incentives that it is crucial to have a
competitive search engine that is
transparent and in the academic realm
and yet here we are in Q2 2024 Google
made $ 847 billion in revenue
76.3% of which came from ads and about
75% of that ad revenue is specifically
from Google search ads alone as opposed
to YouTube ads Etc and then even for
Searchers where there's no product to
sell you and there's no company paying
to sponsor it what does Google do try to
push their own services and their own in
initiatives like how many people are
there on Earth
7951 billion H now don't get me wrong if
I'm looking for a quick answer to a
simple question I appreciate how Google
just goes here you go but in 2024 this
is not the right answer it's actually
not close to the right answer we have
8.2 billion people and if you click into
it you can see that it's showing us the
answer provided by Google initiatives
even if the answer is way more outdated
than other company source is on the
internet but okay you probably catch my
drift by this point Google search
results page is starting to look an
awful lot like a an old 2000's web
portal which is ironic because one of
the biggest reasons that Google actually
beat Yahoo to become the world's deao e
library was because they specifically
didn't try to be one well Yahoo did
because they knew they'd make more money
if they kept people on their own Pages
as much as possible but it's at this
stage into my deep dive that I came to
my second realization that while Google
has fallen from Grace changed who they
are and started to put the users
experience second it's not all Google's
fault a lot of what's been making it so
hard to find the right web page these
days is also down to the people making
them if you work online in any capacity
really or you know you just have really
boring friends you'll have heard of
search engine optimization or seo seo
has become a massive industry with a
market size valued at 1.8 billion in
2022 projected to reach 7.1 billion in
2028 the basic idea is about analyzing
the way that Google's algorithm ranks
pages and then employing various tricks
to make your page look as good as
possible to that algorithm so that you
get placed higher and therefore clicked
more and as the algorithm has changed so
have the kind of tricks you see being
used like for example you used to be
able to boost your visibility just by
having lots of reviews associated with
your business even if those reviews are
negative which led to for instance a
scam in which a man named Vitali borker
deliberately sent damaged or fake
glasses to customers hoping they would
be angered enough to review bomb him
knowing that it would promote his site
but nowadays you'll see these problems
instead sites including buzzwords to
capture as many possible search queries
as you can think of that's why so many
AliExpress listings have
incomprehensible names that are just a
string of largely unrelated words and
it's why articles like recipes which
should be so simple have to start off
with paragraphs of Preamble about how
grandma always made the best cozy warm
winter Autumn cookies
2024 yeah man relatable people updating
old articles even if they do none of the
new research but literally just change
the title to 2024 this happens all the
time in Tech so many times I've been
browsing the best X products of 2024 and
I'll slowly realize as I scroll through
the list that not a single one is from
2024 the website is effectively trying
to scam me by recommending old products
that make no sense today they'll have
erased all mentions of it being written
in 2021 or 2022 and as far as Google's
rules are concerned if an article has
been edited in 2024 it's now a 2024
article companies especially those with
lots of ads on their Pages trying
everything they can to rank really
highly for searches that are totally
unrelated to their brand because they
know it'll get them lots of clicks and
lots of Revenue like why does Forbes
have so many articles on supplements
well because supplement ads pay a lot of
money but here's the kicker the only
companies who are pumping out this much
content and paying to boost their
visibility as much as possible are the
ones with a monetary incentive to do so
and the way do that is being flooded
with affiliate links you can see this
very much in action because there are
papers showing that only a small
percentage of review articles actually
use affiliate marketing but the majority
of the results that come up on a search
do use affiliate marketing and that
means it's got to a stage now where
searching for the best of basically
anything is pointless almost every
single article is a top 10 of products
not selected based on their Merit but in
fact just whether or not they'll get a
kickback when you buy them how many
times have you reached the number one
recommended product in these lists only
to find that it's clearly an imported
product from China being sold for
multiple times what it's worth I can
guarantee that a large slice of these
articles are written with the writer not
actually having bought and tested all 10
products themselves but instead having
gone onto Amazon search for the highest
rated products ideally expensive ones so
they can make more from the affiliate
links and spend 1 hour max compiling
them into a list before spamming that
list with buzzword to try and capture as
many people as possible who will
actually trust this research so why
doesn't Google just fix it well
determining the quality of a result is
actually really complicated the best
that they are able to do right now is to
factor in the reaction of the users from
a Google Presentation what's crazy is
that we don't actually understand
documents Beyond some basic stuff we
hardly look at documents we look at
people if a document gets a positive
reaction we figure it is good if the
reaction is negative it is probably bad
grossly simplified this is the source of
Google's Magic so basically what this
means is if a page is ranking high and
it's getting lots of clicks and those
people end up on that page for ages
scrolling through the Meer of
deliberately vapid text interlaced with
ads to find the actual answer they came
for then the algorithm figures hey they
spent a long time there that must be
good and the Vicious Cycle continues and
one thing that I find is a really
unfortunate side effect of this constant
arms race between Google and then these
slimy growth at all cost sites is that
every time Google updates their
algorithm to counter the new strategies
it's most of the genuinely good
worthwhile sites that don't keep up with
the times and just focus on making good
content those are the ones who get
buried like Mom and Pop Air Purifier
review site house fresh.com who actually
do test the products unlike the top 10
listic or magazines who don't but now we
come to the final frontier because
Google success has always been to do
with AI but now they are integrating
generative large language model AI in
ways that are mostly making things even
worse you've probably noticed an
increasing number of these AI overviews
when you're searching for things coming
up and you probably also noticed they're
not very accurate they often serve you
the kind of flagrantly wrong gobbley yuk
best described with the expression go
enough coined by marketing executive and
search expert AJ con whose research was
super helpful for this video but here's
the thing let's assume that these AI
popups work perfectly 100% of the time
which is obviously the goal that
Google's striving towards how does that
help all the sites that have helped to
First gather that info the sites who've
done the work research and Publishing
the content that it seems like Google is
using to train their AI answer it
doesn't as a matter of fact it actually
seems an awful lot like Google is trying
to replace those sites and on one hand
you could argue that you know AI
summaries are amazing and they're going
to make the search experience even
faster but after doing all of this
digging I'm starting to feel a slightly
different way what's to stop Google from
deciding to use its AI to eventually
replace the need to visit any other
website so you spend your entire
browsing session within Google search
page itself and then the only way to get
ahead of the AI pay for it that way the
entire time you use Google you're paying
Google in some way or another maybe
that's not the world that Google wants
to build but it's hard to argue that
they're not moving closer towards it and
this actually reminds us of something an
idea coined by Cory drro called in
ification which I talk about fully in
this video here and it's effectively
where online services start off by
enticing users with a high quality
product when the users are locked in
they make it worse for them to better
ser their business customers and then
finally once both sides are locked in
they start shating all of them to
maximize profits for themselves by which
point oops we don't have a desirable
product anymore and I think it's fair to
say Google is taking some big swings
into that final stage here and it's
going to sting their business customers
even more than usual considering that
the very mechanism that they're using to
make things harder for them this AI that
they're now having to compete against
only works by stealing their content
anyway now if you do want the web
experience before or this ification back
then I recommend you install surf shark
VPN for a few reasons it cleans up your
browsing cookies popups trackers it's
got a baked in antivirus with a ton of
features like webcam protection which
blocks unauthorized apps from getting
access to your camera but here's what I
think is the coolest so at this point
you probably know how most vpns work
they take your traffic they root it
through one of their servers so that all
the website on the other end can see is
the details of that server and that's
already pretty good but surf shock uses
Nexus technology meaning that every one
of their servers is connected and that
surf Shar can bounce you between all of
them on the fly without dropping your
connection and that's pretty Next Level
because it means your even more
difficult to track you can have a new IP
address every time you click a new link
and instead of your data being masked
through one server your data can be
masked through an entire network of
servers and you will get even better
speeds because as soon as a faster
server option opens up you will be
rooted through that instead of the one
you on automatically and that's just
part of why I use surf sharkk drish uses
surf shark our entire team uses surf
shark it is the only vpm that I
recommend to people and if you go to
Surf shark.com boss it's also more
affordable than ever at just over $2 a
month for an unlimited number of users
with four extra months for free